Justin Martyr
First Apology
1. For the truth shall be spoken; since of old these evil demons, effecting apparitions of
themselves, both defiled women and corrupted boys, and showed such fearful sights to
men, that those who did not use their reason in judging of the actions that were done,
were struck with terror... (Chapter V)
2. And when Socrates endeavoured, by true reason and examination, to bring these things
to light, and deliver men from the demons, then the demons themselves, by means of
men who rejoiced in iniquity, compassed his death, as an atheist and a profane person,
on the charge that “he was introducing new divinities;” and in our case they display a
similar activity. For not only among the Greeks did reason (Logos) prevail to condemn
these things through Socrates, but also among the Barbarians were they condemned by
Reason (or the Word, the Logos) Himself, who took shape, and became man, and was
called Jesus Christ; and in obedience to Him, we not only deny that they who did such
things as these are gods,1774 but assert that they are wicked and impious
demons,1775 whose actions will not bear comparison with those even of men desirous
of virtue. (Chapter V)
3. And we have been taught that He in the beginning did of His goodness, for man’s sake,
create all things out of unformed matter... (Chapter X)
4. For the coming into being at first was not in our own power; and in order that we may
follow those things which please Him, choosing them by means of the rational faculties
He has Himself endowed us with, He both persuades us and leads us to faith. And we
think it for the advantage of all men that they are not restrained from learning these
things, but are even urged thereto (Chapter X).
5. But since our thoughts are not fixed on the present, we are not concerned when men
cut us off; since also death is a debt which must at all events be paid (Chapter XI).
6. Chapter XX.—Heathen analogies to Christian doctrine. And the Sibyl1811 and
Hystaspes said that there should be a dissolution by God of things corruptible. And the
philosophers called Stoics teach that even God Himself shall be resolved into fire, and
they say that the world is to be formed anew by this revolution; but we understand that
God, the Creator of all things, is superior to the things that are to be changed. If,
therefore, on some points we teach the same things as the poets and philosophers
whom you honour, and on other points are fuller and more divine in our teaching, and if
we alone afford proof of what we assert, why are we unjustly hated more than all
others? For while we say that all things have been produced and arranged into a worldby God, we shall seem to utter the doctrine of Plato; and while we say that there will be
a burning up of all, we shall seem to utter the doctrine of the Stoics: and while we affirm
that the souls of the wicked, being endowed with sensation even after death, are
punished, and that those of the good being delivered from punishment spend a blessed
existence, we shall seem to say the same things as the poets and philosophers; and
while we maintain that men ought not to worship the works of their hands, we say the
very things which have been said by the comic poet Menander, and other similar
writers, for they have declared that the workman is greater than the work (Chapter XX).
7. Chapter XXV.—False Gods abandoned by Christians. And, secondly, because we—
who, out of every race of men, used to worship Bacchus the son of Semele, and Apollo
the son of Latona (who in their loves with men did such things as it is shameful even to
mention), and Proserpine and Venus (who were maddened with love of Adonis, and
whose mysteries also you celebrate), or Æsculapius, or some one or other of those who
are called gods—have now, through Jesus Christ, learned to despise these, though we
be threatened with death for it, and have dedicated ourselves to the unbegotten and
impossible God; of whom we are persuaded that never was he goaded by lust of
Antiope, or such other women, or of Ganymede, nor was rescued by that hundredhanded
giant whose aid was obtained through Thetis, nor was anxious on this
account1817 that her son Achilles should destroy many of the Greeks because of his
concubine Briseis. Those who believe these things we pity, and those who invented
them we know to be devils.
8. He became a man among men, some, influenced by the demons before mentioned,
related beforehand, through the instrumentality of the poets, those circumstances as
having really happened, which, having fictitiously devised, they narrated, in the same
manner as they have caused to be fabricated the scandalous reports against us of
infamous and impious actions,1815 of which there is neither witness nor proof—we
shall bring forward the following proof. (Chapter XXIII).
9. Chapter XXXI.—Of the Hebrew prophets. There were, then, among the Jews certain
men who were prophets of God, through whom the prophetic Spirit published
beforehand things that were to come to pass, ere ever they happened. And their
prophecies, as they were spoken and when they were uttered, the kings who happened
to be reigning among the Jews at the several times carefully preserved in their
possession, when they had been arranged in books by the prophets themselves in their
own Hebrew language. And when Ptolemy king of Egypt formed a library, and
endeavoured to collect the writings of all men, he heard also of these prophets, and
sent to Herod, who was at that time king of the Jews,1826 requesting that the books of
the prophets be sent to him. And Herod the king did indeed send them, written, as they
were, in the foresaid Hebrew language. And when their contents were found to be
unintelligible to the Egyptians, he again sent and requested that men be commissioned
to translate them into the Greek language. And when this was done, the booksremained with the Egyptians, where they are until now. They are also in the possession
of all Jews throughout the world; but they, though they read, do not understand what is
said, but count us foes and enemies; and, like yourselves, they kill and punish us
whenever they have the power, as you can well believe. For in the Jewish war which
lately raged, Barchochebas, the leader of the revolt of the Jews, gave orders that
Christians alone should be led to cruel punishments, unless they would deny Jesus
Christ and utter blasphemy. In these books, then, of the prophets we found Jesus our
Christ foretold as coming, born of a virgin, growing up to man’s estate, and healing
every disease and every sickness, and raising the dead, and being hated, and
unrecognised, and crucified, and dying, and rising again, and ascending into heaven,
and being, and being called, the Son of God. We find it also predicted that certain
persons should be sent by Him into every nation to publish these things, and that rather
among the Gentiles [than among the Jews] men should believe on Him. And He was
predicted before He appeared, first 5000 years before, and again 3000, then 2000, then
1000, and yet again 800; for in the succession of generations prophets after prophets
arose. (Chapter XXXI).