<h1>Quintillian (35-100 CE)
INSTITUTIO ORATORIA: Book X </h1>
http://twitter.us13.list-manage.com/track/click?
u=d9ae0033d0cbf2d5b1cbe2e01&id=ad5b2692e8&e=63809cc5c1
1. But these rules of style, while part of the student's theoretical knowledge, are not in
themselves sufficient to give him oratorical power. In addition he will require that
assured facility which the Greeks call ἔξις. I know that many have raised the question
as to whether this is best acquired by writing, reading or speaking, and it would indeed
be a question calling for serious consideration, if we could rest content with any one of
the three. 2 But they are so intimately and inseparably connected, that if one of them be
neglected, we shall but waste the labour which we have devoted to the others. For
eloquence will never attain to its full development or robust health, unless it acquires
strength by frequent practice in writing, while such practice without the models supplied
by reading will be like a ship drifting aimlessly without a steersman. Again, he who
knows what he ought to say and how he should say it, will be like a miser brooding over
his hoarded treasure, unless he has the weapons of his eloquence ready for battle and
prepared to deal with every emergency. (Chapter 1).
2. There can then be no doubt that he must accumulate a certain store of resources, to be
employed whenever they may be required. The resources of which I speak consist in a
copious supply of words and matter. (Chapter 1)
3. And we shall attain our aim by reading and listening to the best writers and orators,
since we shall thus learn not merely the words by which things are to be called, but
when each particular word is most appropriate. 9 For there is a place in oratory for
almost every word, with the exception only of a very few, which are not sufficiently
seemly. (Chapter 1).
4. Now to acquire a knowledge of these words and to be acquainted not merely with their
meaning, but with their forms and rhythmical values, so that they may seem appropriate
wherever employed, we shall need to read and listen diligently, since all language is
received first though the ear. (Chapter 1)